So, in the previous video, we started
talking a little bit about program flow.
So, let's now continue on with that, and
actually talk about the if statement.
So, what I've done is,
I've created a new project in IntelliJ.
And I've called it ifprogramflow.
And I'm going to right-click that now,
click on New, select Python File, and
I'm just gonna call it ifprogramflow.
Making sure that I'm
actually clicked in there.
Okay, so we've seen how we can
store values in variables,
and we can then, print them out.
And we've also looked at how to
get input from the keyboard.
So, we now start getting
Python to make decisions
based on the values of variables, and
the input received from the keyboard.
As a quick recap,
just from the following program,
just to see where we were
at in the previous video.
So, we can type name Equals input.
Please enter your name.
Now, we can type age equals input.
How old are you, placement field, and
we're going to put format name,
you print age.
So, notice how we can apply
formatting to any string,
even the ones that we're going to be
using as a prompt to the input function.
So, in the first line we've
created a variable called name.
And we're going to accept the name
that's been entered by the user
from the keyboard, and
put that into the variable called name.
Then, the next line, line three,
we've got an age, we'll ask it to,
for the user to put how old they are,
and we're using a replacement field,
to actually format, and print the name
that was entered on line two, and
share that on the string, on the screen,
along with the prompt to enter their age,
and on the fourth line, line four,
we actually printed out.
So, if we run this,
please enter your name.
Tim.
How old are you Tim?
I'll say I'm 21, I certainly wish
that I was Press Enter > 21.
So, we can say that's
a bit of a recap we're at.
Now, the input function
returns a string data type.
So, in order to actually convert that 21.
That number that I actually
typed into a number.
If we want age to represent a number,
rather than a string,
we need to actually convert it.
We do that using the int function.
Before making some decisions
based on the person's age.
So, what we can do is actually
change this, to put it int,
which again converts,
what's been typed into a stream.
Then, we actually
have to add a bracket right on the end
of the line to make that valid.
When we go to run it, we will see
that there aren't any differences, so
it will do that same thing.
The only thing is we've changed it now, so
that the data type, because we've selected
the int, it's going to be a number Instead
of what it was before which was a string.
So now, that we've done that what
we can do is we can actually get
the computer to actually try, and
do some processing based on that age.
So, lets do that, so I'm gonna put if,
if age is greater than or equal to,
that's what those two symbols are that
means it greater than or equal to 18.
Then we put a colon and
we press Enter to go to the next line.
Then we're going to print ("You
are old enough to vote.").
So, if we run that.
Before we do that, let's actually type
in something that's not a number, and
see what happens.
We're gonna type in the words twenty one.
We actually got an error.
And the error is that it actually,
basically just is expecting a number, but
it actually receives some text, and
it's got a little bit confused.
So, keep that in mind, that if you specify
something like we've done here, and
an input,
it's gonna assume that that is the case.
But don't worry too much about that,
because we're gonna be covering
error handling, and
input validation in the course.
But for now, to be valid,
we need to make sure that we're
only entering valid numbers.
So, we're gonna go back, and do it again.
Tim?
Twenty-one, and you can see we've got
the message printed "You are old enough
to vote." And, once we've got
the age in the numeric format,
we can actually use the greater than,
and the equal, as we've used here,
to actually check to see whether
it is greater or equal than 18.
And we're doing that using an if
statement, with a condition to check.
So, if the condition is true, in this case
the age was greater than, or equal to 18,
then, we're printing the message
that you're old enough to vote.
If the age is less than 18,
nothing happens.
It actually would go into the next line.
Now, that's a little but unfriendly,
now what we can do we can code you for
that we can put in
something called an else.
Press back, press space will
delete press else or top else.
.
And press Enter.
Print.
Please come back in, and
we're gonna put our replacement field.
Let's use .format.
Let's actually get the computer to decide,
how many years I've gotta come back with.
And we can do that.
We can actually put the number
of years which was 18,
less the current age that was typed in,
so 18 take whatever.
So, if I've actually typed in the age
of 15, it would be 18 take 15 is 3.
So, if we actually run that now, firstly,
I'm putting my name, I'll put 21 we still
get the same message, and notice how this
line here is basically ignored, and
that's because the first part was correct.
So, how the program works is, it comes to,
and looks for this condition, and
if that is true, in other words, in this
case what was typed in is greater than or
equal to 18, then that line is executed.
And then, that line is executed, not
the next line with the else isn't it, and
then, the actual code jumps past the else,
and the print and goes on to next part.
But otherwise, so if the age entered
isn't greater than a towards at 17 or
less, we get the second part.
And just to confirm that,
we can run that again.
Tim, if I put in 15,
please come back in three.
And I should go back to change that,
and put that in years, like so.
If we actually run that again, Tim 15.
Please come back in three years.
Now, the other thing to note
here is the block of code
that's within these conditions can have
more than one line of code to execute.
So, in other words we can come back, and
put, you're old enough to vote, print,
please put an X in the ballot box or
more correctly print x in the box.
Else, we'll leave that as it is.
Now, if we run that again.
Tim, 15.
We get the else only,
please come back in three years.
But if actually run it again,
and type in Tim.
21.
You're old enough to vote,
please put an X in the box.
So basically,
the code that's in this block of code,
all of that is going to be executed
if this condition above it is true.
So likewise, we could've done
a similar thing for the else.
We could put extra code down here, and
provided it's indented correctly,
that's going to run,
if that else condition is actually true
in this case, if h was less than 18.
Now, sometimes you might need more
than 2 cases, so what Python does,
it let's us test conditions by letting us
the L if which is an abbreviation for.
So, let's actually come up with another
example, and move on from this one,
so I'm going to comment that out.
And I've commented on that.
You noticed that at the bottom it
actually tells you the command I used.
Command slash which is
control slash on Windows or
Linux, and that gives you a way to
actually comment out a locator once.
So, if you want to instead of just
deleting something instead of
comment it out, so that it's not going to
be executed, that's a way of doing it.
Let's type another example in.
I'm gonna print, please guess a number,
between 1and 10.
We're going to set guess,
the variable guess,
to convert the input to an int, and
get that number from the keyboard.
Now, we're going to do some
testing using the if statements.
So, we're going to put if,
guess is less than 5, print.
Please guess, higher.
Guess equals input, and
we need to add a [INAUDIBLE] to make
it valid, converting it to a number, so
we can do these if comparisons, and then,
we're gonna put if guess is equal to 5.
Now, notice when I'm putting equal to 5,
I've had to put two equals.
If you use one equal sign,
like the line above, guess equals int,
we're actually setting the value for
the guess variable.
But two equals together,
that's actually doing a test.
We're actually saying, does the guess
variable have a value of 5 to it.
So, if that's the case we're
going to put another colon,
press enter, print,
well done, you guessed it.
And pressing backspace again, else print,
sorry you have not guessed correctly.
So, I can see what's happened there,
if your guess is less than five,
you're gonna print please guess higher.
If your guess equals input, if your
guess equals five, print well done,
you've guessed it.
Else, print sorry,
you have not guessed correctly.
But, what we're also gonna do
is we're going to embed that, so
we're going to press backspace, backspace,
type elif which stands for else if,
guess greater than five, you're gonna
type print, please guess lower.
Guess equals input.
Guess equals int input.
If guess is equal to five,
the two equals again, print, well done.
You guessed it.
Else, print sorry you have
not guessed correctly.
And so, and informally,
and here we can put else,
print you got it this time.
So, you can see we've got
quite a few ifs there, and
an elif, an else if and then,
an else down at the bottom.
So, what's actually happening here, we're
doing if the guess, that the first number
that they typed is less than five, then
it will go into, and execute this code.
Otherwise, getting back to
the start again, that wasn't true,
so in other words,
what they type was greater than five,
then this code down here will be executed.
We'll do a test here to see whether
the guess is greater than five,
and if it was it's going
to execute that code.
And finally, the third level, else,
will be if you typed five for
the first time when you get that error, or
get that message to say that you
got it right the first time.
So, the indentation level is very
important to actually get an idea,
of what's actually working
because this level of if,
is completely different to this level.
This second level was only
going to be executed.
The codes only going to go in there,
if this condition was true.
So, let's actually run it using that code,
and see how the code's
actually going to work.
So, let's do the first test, and
we type in the number that's exactly five.
You got it first time.
So, what happened was, this code was
executed, guess is less than five,
and that didn't happen, because guess was
equal to five it's not less than five.
So, the computer jumps into this line of
code, and says okay, was the guess that
was entered greater than five, or no in
this case it wasn't because we typed five.
So therefore, it jumped to the third one,
which was else, and printed that list,
cuz there wasn't a condition.
Else, without any statement means just
actually print whatever else is there.
So, running it again.
This time if we type a number,
let's say typing a number that's 4.
And it says, Please guess higher, so
you can see, is guess less than 5?
Well yes, cuz it's 4.
If guess is equal to 5,
print Well done, you guessed it.
So if we type 5 in here now it should come
up and say, Well done, you guessed it.
But if we run it again, and
put four, please get's higher,
this time we're going to guess 890.
Sorry you've not guess correctly.
And lastly, we'll do a test and we'll say,
we'll start with ten, please guess lower.
Your top five.
Well now, you've guessed it.
And run it again.
12, please guess lower.
11, sorry you've not guessed correctly.
So, you can see, I hope you're now getting
an idea about how you can actually,
how this code works, and how blocks can
be quite complex including further if and
else blocks, and much more contained
within it, you saw how when testing for
equality we don't use
a single equal symbol.
We use the two symbols to actually check
to see whether value has a certain value.
And of course a single equal is if you're
assigning a value as in this line here.
Assigning the variable guess,
the value of whatever of was
typed by the user converting
it automatically to a number.
Now, and if statement can also include
many else ifs, elifs, and as you can see,
I've already used one there.
I've already used one elif,
and then at the last line,
we used an else, which is sorta the final
test that we can actually have.
If all else files,
it's gonna go to that part of the code.
Now, there are much better ways of
writing code than what we've shown here,
this is really just
an example to get you going.
And you will see better
ways of doing this shortly.
One of the bad things that we've done here
is we're actually duplicated code, so
we've actually added this code here for
example, we've duplicated there,
and we've duplicated it there.
And we wouldn't want to do that in
a real-world scenario, but this again,
just to get us going.
If you ever see something like this
when you're programming though,
that's probably a good indication
that the code that you're working on
could be improved or
reducing that duplication.
So, we saw that in a previous bit of code
this one up here, greater than or equal,
you can actually test for
that using a greater than or
equal sign as you saw there.
We can test for
equality with the two equals.
greater than which is the greater than
sign likewise with the less than.
And there's a couple
of other ones as well.
which we'll see as we go through.
There's a not equal which
would be similar to that.
Which would be like this.
If you want to check something
that is not equal to.
And there's also a less than and equal
which works just like a greater than does,
but obviously,
it's the other side comparison,
making sure our value is either
less than or equal to that value.
So now,
we actually know how to actually check for
nautical as I showed you briefly,
by doing something like that,
we can actually change our code,
and make it a lot more efficient.
So, what we could actually
do here is we could,
instead of putting if guess is less than
5, we could put if guess not equal to 5.
And the next time we could
put if guess less than 5,
and then, we could indent that
to put please print higher.
Else, print please guess lower.
Please, guess lower.
And what we can do then,
is we can put guess equals int, input.
Then, put if guess, is equal to 5,
print, well done you guessed it,
else, print("Sorry,
you have not guessed correctly").
And then, removing this else if now,
the elif, which we no longer need.
Deleting that, we can actually just
print("You got it first time").
So, you can see we've now
consolidated that code.
We're doing a test at the start.
So, if guest is not equal to 5,
so if any value other than 5 was entered,
we're gonna start processing down here.
But if 5 was entered,
we're gonna go straight down to here,
just how you got it first time.
They were doing a test say if guess is
less than five, the message would say,
please guess higher, because we
know the number needs to be higher.
Else, at this point the number has to be
higher, so we print a message that says,
please guess lower.
And will ask for an input again, and
if the guess is correct, and equal to 5,
we print a message that say, what we've
done you guessed it, should be guessed.
Otherwise, we put in summary
you've not guessed correctly, and
this funnel else,
is only called at this level
which would be if they actually
got it right the first time.
So, let's just run that, and
confirm that it still works.
So, I enter number 5 first.
He got it right, first time.
So, the first test to see whether it's
not equal to 5 doesn't go into there, so
therefore, it has to be equal
to 5 because we've tested for
not equal here, so we're getting that
message correctly, gonna run this again,
went to the number four,
please gets higher.
Which you would expect it to do.
Now, when I try another number this time
we'll say six, sorry it could not guess
correctly, run it again four,
this time we'll actually guess five.
Well, now you've guessed it, and that's
because this bit of code was executed
because the second time we actually
asked for the input which was there.
Just doing another test to see
whether we've got it right.
And finally,
we'll hit a number like eight.
Please guess lower.
Five.
Well, now you've guessed it, and
the last one we'll actually do a test for
eight.
And so six,
sorry you have not guessed it correctly.
So, you can see this really highlights
the importance of indenting your
code in Python,
because the second guess, this one here,
is not at all dependent on this other code
that's in this first block, so it's really
important to structure your code, to put
your code in the right indentation level,
and that helps you ensure that you're
executing the code in the right scenarios.
So, for example, here that's only going
to execute is guests is less than five.
This line's only going to be executed
if guests is greater than five,
but in this case, here, this code is
going to be executed no matter what,
because we haven't got any tests, and
it's not indented to the next level.
Indented, it's going to be, running
the code at the same level, if you will.
One of the other things
we could've done there.
We could've done something like
# guest must be greater than 5.
Which will tell us that, because in
this code here we can see that, okay,
that's at less than 5 test.
Sometimes with just an else it can
be a good idea to put a comment,
just to spell out what the scenario is,
what this else is gonna be called for.
In this case It's only going to be
executed if guess is greater than five, so
that can be a good place to put a comment,
just to confirm your
understanding of the actual code.
And it also helps yourself certainly, but
also other programmers in the future,
who are actually reading that
to figure out what's going on.
And again, just a reminder that comments
are ignored by the Python interpreter, and
they're there purely
to document your code.
So generally, if you use comments to
explain why you've done something in
a certain way, or as a reminder of
certain conditions, or variable states,
that may not be obvious to someone
who's reading it for the first time.
And remember that,
this is very important in comments,
if you come back to tomorrow for
a code weeks or
months after you wrote it, that
documentation can really come in handy.
And just a final thing about comments
before we end this video is that
Python does provide a way to
have multiline comments, and
we'll be covering that in the section
on documentation, and doc strings, and
you can find out more about it there.
For now, if you want a comment to span
several lines just start each line
with a hash.
That you've seen at the top
of this code here now.
Okay, so
we're gonna end this video here now.
When we come back in the next video,
we're gonna start looking at
more complicated conditions than the
simple ones that we've used so far, and
show you how Python provides the means
to produce quite complex expressions.